
_THE MANER of the TRYUMPHE AT CALEYS AND BULLEYN._




_This Edition is limited to 75 Large Paper copies, and 275 Small Paper
copies, issued only to Subscribers._




Bibliotheca Curiosa.


  THE MANER OF THE TRYUMPHE OF CALEYS AND BULLEYN,

  AND THE

  NOBLE TRYUMPHAUNT CORONACYON OF QUENE ANNE,
  _Wyfe unto the Most Noble Kynge Henry VIII_.


  _Printed by_ WYNKYN DE WORDE, _1532-33_.


  Edited by
  EDMUND GOLDSMID, F.R.H.S., F.S.A. (Scot.)

  PRIVATELY PRINTED, EDINBURGH.
  1884.




INTRODUCTION.


The two extremely rare tracts here given have been reprinted by Prof.
Arber in his "English Garner," if we can call _reprinting_ the issuing of
a pamphlet not only with the spelling entirely modernised, but also with
words and phrases inserted or inverted to suit the Editor's taste. In the
"_Tryumphe at Caleys_" Mr Arber has issued the Second Edition, giving us
no particulars whatever as to the First. In the list of the noblemen of
France, Mr Arber modernises the names and yet gives us a Cardinal
_Gramond_, being evidently unaware of the existence of the noble family of
de Grammont, and he equally fails to recognise in the Comte de Tonnore,
the celebrated Armand, Comte de Tonnerre. Anne de Montmerancy remains for
him an unknown actor on the brilliant stage, and yet, surely, the name of
the Montmorency must have reached his ears.

I have here given an absolute reprint of the first edition and have noted
at the foot of each page any variations in the readings which occur in the
second. Both Editions were printed by Wynkyn de Worde, probably about
November, 1532. The collation according to the copies in the British
Museum (c. 21, b. 20) is as follows. It is a black letter, unpaged tract
of four leaves. Page 1 contains the title, with a woodcut of Henry VIII.
on horseback, with two attendants.[1] Page 2 is blank in the First
Edition but contains a list of the noblemen of France in the second. Then
come five pages of text in the First Edition, followed by page 8 blank,
whilst the Second Edition has six pages of text. The second tract, "The
Cornacyon of Quene Anne," was printed by Wynkyn de Worde in 1533. I trust
the few notes I have added, either for the purpose of explaining obsolete
words or to give a slight clue to the identity of the more important
persons mentioned, may prove of use to the student.

EDMUND GOLDSMID.

EDINBURGH, _Nov. 15th, 1884_.




  The Maner of
    the Tryumphe
      at Caleys
        and Bulleyn.




The Maner of the Tryumphe of Caleys and Bulleyn.[2]

_Cum Priuilegio._[3]


I[4] will certyfye you of our newes in the partyes of Caleys. Fyrst the
xj. day of October whiche was Fryday in the mornyng at. v. of the clocke
the kynges grace toke his Shyppe called the Swallowe and so came to
Caleys by. x. of the clocke. And there he was receyved with processyon
and with the mayre and the lorde delite and all the speres[5] and the
sowdyours in araye with a greate peale of gonnes and laye in Caleys tyll
the Sondaye seuenyght after. And on the. xvj. day of October my lorde of
Norffolke accompanyed with my lord of Darby and a great nombre of
gentilmen besydes mette with the great mayster of Fraunce vj. myles fro
Calays at y{e} englysshe pale the sayd great mayster hauynge two greate
lordes in his company of theyr ordre and a hondred gentylmen attendynge
vpon them. And there my lorde of Norffolke and the greate mayster deuysed
the place where the two kynges sholde mete whiche was at Sandyngfelde. And
that done they wente bothe to Caleys with theyr companyes. And the sayd
greate mayster with dyuerse other straungers dyned that daye with y{e}
Kynge. And after dyner my lorde of Norffolke brought them forth on theyr
way a myle or two and so departed for that tyme. And on the mondaye the.
xxj. daye of October the Kyng of Englande toke his waye to mete with the
frensshe kyng at the place before appoynted with vij. score all in veluet
cotes afore hym lordes and Knyghtes and xl. of his garde and other to the
nombre (as we thynke) of. vj. hondred horses and as well horsed as euer
was seen. And y{e} Kyng our mayster mette with the frensshe Kyng at
Sandyngfelde within the englysshe pale thre myles. There the frensshe
kynge taryed for our mayster the space of an houre or two the frensshe
kynge beynge accompanyed with the kynge of Nauerne the cardinal of Loreyn
the duke of Vandome and[6] with dyuerse other noblemen well and rychely
appoynted beynge of lyke nombre as our kyng was of that is to saye vj.
hondred psones.[7] There was the louyngest metyng that euer was seen for
the one embraced y{e} other v. or vj. tymes on horsbacke and so dyd the
lordes on eyther party eche to other and so dyd ryde hande in hande with
greate loue the space of a myle[8] and than they dyd lyght of theyr horses
and dranke eche to other the frensshe kyng dranke fyrst to our kyng and
whan they had dronke they embraced eche other agayne with great loue and
so rode towards Bulleyn our kynge on the ryght hande. And whan they came
within a myle of Bulleyn there mette with the kynges the Dolphyn beynge
accompanyed with his two bretherne the duke of Orliaunce and the count or
erle of Angolame very goodly chyldren and attendyng vpon them four
cardynalles with a M. horses very well beseen. And whan they came nere to
y{e} towne the frensshe kynge caused our mayster to tary whyles y{e}
gonshot was shotte whiche was herd fro Bulleyn. xx. englysshe myles of.
And so entered the towne where stode the captayn with the sowdyours in
good ordre and aboue them stode a hondred swytsheners of the frensh kynges
garde in theyr dublettes and theyr hosen of yelowe veluet cutte goodly
persons[9] and aboue them stode cc. of the frensshe kynges garde more
scottes and frensshmen in cotes of yelow blewe and crymsyn veluet beryng
halberdes in theyr handes and aboue them stode cc. gentylmen beyng in
theyr gownes well and rychely beseen euery man hauyng an ax[10] in theyr
handes and theyr captaines standyng by them. And so they taryed in Bulleyn
mondaye tuysdaye Wednesday and thursday all daye.[11] And for the greate
chere that was there no man can expresse it. For the kynges grace was
there enterteyned all at the frensshe kynges costes and charges. And euery
daye noble men of Fraunce desyred our nobles and gentylmen home to theyr
lodgynges where as they founde theyr houses rychely hanged greate
cupbordes of plate sumptuous fare with syngyng and playenge of all kyndes
of musyke. And also there was sent vnto our lodgynges great fare with all
maner of wynes for our seruantes and our horsmeet payd for and al at theyr
charges. And euery day y{e} frensshe kyng had at dyner and souper with
hym certayne noble men of Englande. And the kynges grace had in lykewyse
certeyn of theyr nobles at dyner and souper during y{e} tyme of theyr
beyng at Bulleyn. And this contynued with as great chere and familiarite
as myght be. And as concernyng ladyes and gentylwoman there[12] was non
there. And on frydaye folowynge the kynges came to Caleys. And the dolphyn
with the cardynalles and all theyr gentylmen brought the kynges vnto y{e}
place where they fyrst mette and than departed. The frensshe king had
great cariage[13] for there came ccc. mules laden w{h} stuffe. And[14]
whan they came to Caleys they were saluted with great melody what with
gonnes and all other instrumentes and the ordre of the towne it was a
heuenly syght for the tyme First at Newnam bridge. iiij. c. shotte at the
blockhous. xl. shot at Rycebanke toure. iij. c. shot within y{e} towne of
Caleys. ij. m. shot great and small besydes the shyppes it was all
nombered. iij. m. shot. And at Bulleyn by estymation it past not. cc. shot
but they were great peces. Also for the ordre of the towne there was set
all seruynge men on the one syde in tawny cotes and sowdyours on the other
syde all in cotes of reed and blewe with halberdes in theyr handes. And so
the kynges came ryding in the myddes and so the frensshe kynge went to
staple hall which is a pryncely hous and vpon saterday bothe the kynges
rode to our lady chyrche to masse. And at after noone[15] bothe theyr
counselles sate togyder. And vpon sondaye both y{e} kynges herde masse in
theyr lodgynges. And at after-noone the kynge of Englande went to Staple
hall to the frensshe kynge and there was bothe bere baytynge and
bulbayting tyll nyght. And at nyght the frensshe kynge souped with our
kynge and there was greate bankettynge. And after souper[16] there came in
a maske mylady marques of Penbroke[17] my lady Mary[18] my lady Darby my
lady Fitzwater my lady Rocheford my lady Lislie and my lady Wallop
gorgyously apparayled with visers on theyr faces and so came and toke the
frensshe kynge by the hande and other lordes of Fraunce and daunced a
daunce or two. And after that the kynge toke of theyr visers and than they
daunced with gentylmen of Fraunce an houre after. And than they departed
to theyr lodgynges. And as for y{e} apparayle of y{e} frensshe lordes my
tongue can not expresse it and in especyal the frensshe kyng his
apparayle passed[19] my penne to wryte for he had a dublet ouer set all
with stones and ryche diamondes whiche was valued by discrete men at a
hondred thousand pounde they passed ferre our lordes and knyghtes in
apparayle and rychesse. They had greate chere in Caleys and louynge also
and all at our kynges costes and charges. Also the same daye that the
kynges came from Bulleyn the frensshe kynge made the duke of Norffolke and
the duke of Suffolke of the ordre of saynt Mighill.[20] And vpon monday
whiche was the. xxix. day of October at Caleys our kyng made the great
mayster of Fraunce and the admyrall of Fraunce knyghtes of the garter. And
that daye there was a greate wrastelynge betwene englysshe men and
frensshe men before bothe the kynges the frensshe kynge had none but
preestes that wrasteled which were bygge men and stronge they were
bretherne but they had moost falles.[21] And vpon the. xxix. daye of
October the frensshe kynge departed fro Caleys to Parys ward and our kynge
brought hym as ferre as Morgyson which is fro Caleys. vij. myle and so
came to Caleys agayne. And he purposeth (god wyllynge) to be at
Caunterbury the. viij. daye of Nouember and so home whome god of his
goodnes euer preserue and sende good passage and safe agayne into
Englande. Amen.

God Saue the Kynge.

  Imprynted by Wynkyn de Worde vnder
     the grace and preuylege of our moost
     royall and redoubted prynce Kynge
     Henry the viii. for Johan Gowgh
     dwellinge at Poules gate in Chepe.


_Cum Priuilegio._




  The Noble
    Tryumphaunt
      Coronacyon of
        Quene Anne.




The Noble Tryumphaunt Coronacyon of Quene Anne,

_Wyfe unto the Moost Noble Kynge Henry the VIII_.[22]


First the. xxix. daye of Maye[23] beynge thursday all the worshypfull
craftes[24] and occupacyons in their best araye goodly besene toke theyr
bargs which were splayed[25] w{h} goodly baners fresshe and newe with the
cognysaunce and armes of theyr faculty to the nombre of L. great barges
comly besene and euery barge hauynge mynstrels makynge greate and sweete
armony. Also there was the bachelers barge comly besene decked with
innumerable baners and all about hangyd with ryche cloth of golde
foystes[26] waytynge her upon decked[27] with a great shotte of ordynaunce
whiche descended the ryuer afore all y{e} barges and the bachelers barge
formest[28] and so folowynge in good araye and ordre euery crafte in theyr
degree and ordre tyll they came to Greenwyche and there taryed abydynge
the quenes grace which was a wonderfull goodly syght to beholde. Than at
thre of the clocke the quenes grace cam to her barge and incontynent[29]
all the cytezins with that goodly company set forth towards London in good
arraye as before is sayd. And to wryte what nombre of gon shot what with
chambres and great peces of ordynaunce were shotte as she passed by in
dyuers places it passeth my memory to wryte or to tell the nombre of them
and specially at Ratly and at lyme house out of certeyne shyppes. And so
y{e} quenes grace in her ryche barge amonge her nobles the cytezyns
accompanyed her to London unto the toure wharfe. Also or she came nere the
toure there was shot innumerable peces of ordynaunce as euer was there by
any mennes remembraunces where the Kyng receyued her grace with a noble
louyng countenaunce and so gaue great thankes and prayse to all the
cytezyns for theyr great kyndnesse and louynge labour and paynes in that
behalfe taken to the greate ioye and comforte of all the citezyns. Also to
beholde the wonderfull nombre of people that euer was seen that stode on
the shore on bothe sydes of the ryuer was neuer in one syght out of y{e}
cyte of London sene what in goodly lodgynges and houses that be on y{e}
ryuer syde bytwene Grenwyche and London it passeth al mennes iudgementes
to esteme the infinyte nombre of them. Wherein her grace with al her
ladyes reioysed moche.

Knyghtes made at Grenwyche the sonday before Whytsonday.

And the sondaye before this tryumphe beyng the xxv daye of Maye the Kynge
made at his maner of Grenwyche all these Knyghtes.

  Syr Christofer Danby.
  Syr Christofer Hylarde.
  Syr Brian Hastynges.
  Syr Thomas Methven.
  Syr Thomas Butteller.
  Syr Willyam Walgrave.
  Syr Wyllyam Feldeyng.

The fryday made Knyghtes of the Bathe xix whose names foloweth.

Also on fryday the xxx day of Maye y{e} Kynge treated and made in the
towre of London, xix. noble men Knyghtes of the bathe whose names folowe.

  The lorde Marques Dorset.
  The erle of Derby.
  The lorde Clyfforde sone and heyre to therle of Cumberlande.
  The lorde Fitzwater sone and heyre to therle of Sussex.
  The lorde Hastynges sone and heyre to therle of Huntyngton.
  The Lorde Barkelay.
  The lorde Mountagle.
  The lorde Vaux.
  Syr Henry Parker sone and heyre to y{e} lorde Morley.
  Syr Wyllyam Wyndsour sone and heyre to the lorde Wyndesour.
  Syr John Mordant sone and heyre to y{e} lorde Mordant.
  Syr Fraunces Weston.
  Syr Thomas Aroundell.
  Syr Johan Hudelston.
  Syr Thomas Ponynges.
  Syr Henry Sauell.
  Syr George Fitz Wyllyam of Lyncolne shire.
  Syr Johan Tyndall.
  Syr Thomas Jermey.

Also the saturday the last daye of May the Kynge made Knyghtes of the
swerde in y{e} towre of London whose names folowe.

  Syr Wyllyam Drury.
  Syr John Gernyngham.
  Syr Thomas Rusche.
  Syr Randolfe Buerton.
  Syr George Caluerly.
  Syr Edwarde Fytton.
  Syr George Conyers.
  Syr Robert Nedham.
  Syr Johan Chaworth.
  Syr George Gresley.
  Syr Johan Constable.
  Syr Thomas Umpton.
  Syr John Horsley.
  Syr Richarde Lygon.
  Syr Johan Saintclere.
  Syr Edwarde Maidison.
  Syr Henry Feryngton.
  Syr Marmaduc Tustall.
  Syr Thomas Halsall.
  Syr Robert Thyrkham.
  Sir[30] Anthony Wyndsour.
  Syr Water Hubbert.
  Syr Johan Wyllongby.
  Syr Thomas Thytson.
  Sir Thomas Mysseden.
  Sir Thomas Fouleshurst.
  Sir Henry Delues.
  Sir Peter Warburton.
  Sir Rycharde Bulkelley.
  Sir Thomas Lakyng.
  Sir Henry Lakyng.
  Sir Water Smythe.
  Sir Henry Eueringham.
  Sir Willyam Unedall.
  Sir Tho. Massyngberd.
  Sir Willyam Sandon.
  Sir James Baskeruille.
  Sir Edmonde Trafforde.
  Sir Arthur Eyre.
  Sir Henry Sutton.
  Sir Johan Nories.
  Sir Willyam Malorie.
  Sir Johan Harcourt.
  Sir Johan Tyrell.
  Sir Willyam Browne.
  Sir Nycolas Sturley.
  Sir Randolfe Manering.

Also the sonday after Whytsonday beyng trynyte sonday and the viij. daye
of June was made at Grenewyche these knyghtes followynge.

  Sir Christofer Cowen.
  Sir Geffray Mydelton.
  Sir Hugh Treuyneon.
  Sir George West.
  Sir Clement Herleston.
  Sir Humfrey Feryes.
  Sir Johan Dawne.
  Sir Richarde Haughton.
  Sir Thomas Langton.
  Sir Edwarde Bowton.
  Sir Henry Capell.

Also all the pauements of the cyte from Charyncrosse to y{e} towre was
ouer couerde and caste with grauell. And the same saturday beyng Whytson
euen the mayre with all the aldermen and the craftes of the cyte prepared
aray in a good order to stande and receyue her and with rayles for euery
crafte to stande and leane from prease of people. The mayre mette the
quenes grace at her comyng forthe of y{e} towre and all his bretherne and
aldermen standyng in chepe. And upon the same saturday the quene came
forth from y{e} towre towarde Westmynster in goodly aray as here after
foloweth. She passed the stretes first with certayne straungers then
horses trapped w{h} blewe sylke and them selues in blewe veluet with white
fethers acompanyed two and two. Lykewise squiers knights barons and
baronetts knightes of y{e} bath clothed in vyolet garmentes edged with
armyns lyke iuges. Than folowyng y{e} juges of the lawe and abbottes. All
these estats were to y{e} nombre of CC. cople w{h} more two and two
accompanyed. And than folowed bysshops two and two: and tharch bysshops of
Yorke and Caterbury y{e} ambassaders of Fraunce and Venyce the lorde mayre
w{h} a mace mayster garter the kyng of heraudes and the kings cote armour
upon him with y{e} offycers of armes apoyntyng euery estate in their
degre. Than folowed two aunciente knights with olde fassion hattes poudred
on their heedes disgysed who dyd represent y{e} duke of Normandy and of
Guyen after an olde custome: the lorde constable of Englande for y{e} tyme
beyng y{e} duke of Suffolke the lorde Willyam Hawarde y{e} deputie for
y{e} tyme to the lorde marshall duke of Norfolke. Than folowed y{e} quenes
grace in her lytter costly and rychly besene w{h} a ryche canape ouer her
which bare y{e} lordes of y{e} fyue portes: after her folowyng y{e}
mayster of her horse w{h} a whyte spare palfray ledde in his hande rychly
apoynted. Than folowed her noble ladyes of estate rychly clothed in
crymosyn poudred w{h} armyns to the nobre of xij. Than the mayster of y{e}
garde with the garde on both sydes of the strets in good aray and all the
constables well besene in veluet and damaske cotes with whyte stanes in
their handes settynge euery man in araye and orner in the stretes untyll
she came to Westminster. Than folowed four ryche charyottes with ladyes of
honour after than folowed xxx. ladyes and gentylwomen r(ich)ly[31]
garnysshed and so y{e} seruyng men after them. And a(s)[32] she was
departed from y{e} towne a meruaylous great shot of gonnes was there fyred
and shot. So this moste noble company passed till her grace came to
fanchurch where was a pagent fayre and semly w{h} certayne chyldren which
saluted her grace with great honour and prayse after a goodly fassyon: and
so passed forthe to Grase churche where was a ryght costly pagent of
Apollo with the nyne muses amonge y{e} mountaynes syttyng on y{e} mount of
Pernasus and euery of them hauynge theyr instruments and apparayle
acordyng to the descryption of poets and namely of Uirgyll with many
goodly verses to her great prayse and honour. And so she passed forth
through gracyous[33] strete unto leaden hall where was buylded a
sumptuous and a costly pagent in maner of a castell wherein was
fasshyoned an heuenly roufe and under it vpon a grene was a roote or a
stocke whereout spronge a multytude of whyte roses and reed curyously
wrought so from the heuenly roufe descended a whyte faucon and lighted
upon y{e} said stocke and roote and incontynent descended an angell w{h}
goodly armony hauynge a close crowne bytwene his handes and set it on the
faucons heed: and on the said flour sate saynt Anne in y{e} hyest place on
that one syde her progeny w{h} scripture that is to wete the thre Marys
w{h} theyr issue y{t} is to vnderstande: Mary the mother of Christ Mary
Solome y{e} mother[34] of Zebedee with the two chyldren of them also Mary
Cleophe with her husbande Alphee with their four chyldren on y{e} other
syde with other poetycall verses sayd and songe w{h} a balade in englisshe
to her great prayse (and)[35] honour and to al her progeny also. And so
she passed (for)th[36] from thence through cornehill and at y{e} condyt
was a sumptuous pagent of the thre graces: and at the comynge of the
quenes grace a poete declared the nature of all those thre ladyes and gave
hye prayses vnto the quene. And after his preamble fynysshed every lady
partyculer spake great honour and hye prayse of the quenes grace: And so
she passed forth with all her nobles tyll she came in chepe and at the
great condyt was made a costly fountayne whereout ranne whyte wyne claret
and reed great plenty all that after noone: and ther was great melody w{h}
speches. And so passed forthe through chepe to the standarde whiche was
costly and sumptuously garnisshed with gold and asure with armes and
stories wher was great armony and melody: and so passed she forth by the
crosse in chepe whiche was newe garnisshed and so through chepe towarde
the lesser condyt. And in the mydwaye bytwene the recorder of London
receyved her afore the Aldermen with great reuerence and honour salutynge
her grace with a louyng and humble preposycion presentynge her grace with
a ryche and costly purse of golde and in it a thousande marke in golde
coyne gyuen vnto her as a free gyfte of honour: to whom she gaue great
thankes bothe with herte and mynde. And so her grace passed a lytell
further and at the lesser condyt was a costly and a ryche pagent where as
was goodly armonye of musyke and other mynstrels with syngyng: And within
that pagent was fyue costly seates wherin was set these fyue personages
that is to wete Juno Pallas Mercury and Venus and Parys hauyng a ball of
golde presentyng it to her grace with certayne verses of great honour and
chyldren syngyng a balade to her grace and prayse to all her ladyes and so
passed forth to Poules gate where was a proper and a sumptuous pagent y{t}
is to wete ther sat. iij. fayre ladyes virgyns costly arayde with a fayre
rounde trone ouer their heedes where aboute was written this. Regina Anna
prospere procede et regna that is in englysshe Quene Anne prospere procede
and reygne. The lady that sate in the myddes hauynge a table of golde in
her hande wrytten with letters of asure. Ueni amica coronaberis. Come my
loue thou shallbe crowned. And two aungels hauyng a close crowne of golde
bytwene their handes. And the lady on y{e} ryght hande had a table of
syluer wherein was writte. Domine dirige gressos meos. Lorde god dyrecte
my wayes. The other on the lyfte hande had in another table of syluer
written thus. Confide in domino. Trust in god. And vnder theyr fete was a
longe rol wherin was written this. Regina Anna nouum regis de sanguine
natum cum paries populis aurea secla tuis. Quene Anne whan y{u} shalte
beare a newe sone of y{e} kynges bloode there shalbe a golden worlde vnto
thy people. And so y{e} ladyes caste ouer her heede a multytude of wafers
with rose leaues and about y{e} wafers were written with letters of gold
this posay.[37] And so her grace passed forth into Poules chyrchyarde and
at the eest ende of y{e} chyrch agaynst y{e} schole was a great scaffolde
whereon stode y{e} nombre of two hundred chyldren well befene who receyued
w{h} poetes verses to her noble honour whan they had fynisshed she sayd
Amen w{h} ioyful smylyng countenaunce and so passed forth thrugh the longe
chyrchyarde and so to Ludgate whiche was costly and sumptuously garnysshed
with golde colours and asure with swete armony of ballades to her greate
prayse and honour w{h} dyuerse swete instrumentes. And thus her grace came
thorowe the cyte with great honour and royaltye and passed thorowe Flete
strete tyll she came to y{e} Standarde and condyth where was made a fayre
toure with foure tourrettes with fanes there within great plenty of swete
instrumentes w{h} chyldren syngyng the standarde of mason warke costly
made with ymages and aungels costly gylted with golde and asure with other
colours and dyuerse fortes of armes costly set out shall there contynue
and remayne and within the standarde a vyce with a chyme. Also there ranne
out of certayne small pypes great plenty of wyne all that after-noone. And
so her grace passed through the cyte to temple barre and so to Charyng
crosse and so thorowe Westmynster into Westmynster hall where that was
well and rychly hanged with cloth of Arras with a meruaylous ryche
cupborde of plate and there was a voyde[38] of spyce plates and wyne. And
y{t} done the quenes grace withdrewe her in to y{e} whyte hall for that
nyght and so to Yorke place by water. The sondaye in y{e} mornynge at
viij. of the clocke y{e} quenes grace w{h} noble ladyes in theyr robes of
estate w{h} al y{e} nobles aparayled in parlyament robes as dukes erles
archbysshops and bysshops w{h} barons and the barons of y{e} fyue
portes[39] with the mayre of y{e} cite the aldermen in theyr robes as
mantels of scarlet. The barons of y{e} fyve portes bare a ryche canopy of
cloth of golde with stanes of golde and four belles of syluer and gylt.
The abbot of Westmynster in his rygals[40] came in to y{e} hall in
pontificalibus w{h} his monkes in theyr best copes the Kynges chapell in
theyr best copes with y{e} bysshops rychely aourned[41] in pontificalibus
and the ray cloth blewe spredde from the hygh desses of y{e} kynges benche
unto the hygh aulter of Westmynster. And so every man procedynge to the
mynster in y{e} best order euery man after theyr degree apoynted to theyr
order and office as aperteyneth came vnto y{e} place apoynted where her
grace receyued her crowne w{h} al y{e} serymonyes therof as ther vnto
belongeth. And so al y{e} serimonyes done w{h} y{e} solempne masse they
departed home in their best orders euery man to the hal of Westmynster
where y{e} quenes grace withdrew her for a tyme in to her chambre apoynted
and so after a certayne space her grace came in to y{e} hall. Than ye
shulde haue sene euery noble man doyng their seruyce to them apoynted in
y{e} best maner y{t} hath ben sene in any suche serimony. The quenes grace
wasshed y{e} archbisshop of Canterbury sayd grace. Than y{e} nobles were
set to the table therw{h} came y{e} quenes seruice w{h} y{e} seruyce of
tharch bysshop a certayne space thre men with the quenes grace seruyce.
Before y{e} said seruyce came y{e} duke of Suffolke high constable y{t}
day and stewarde of y{e} feest on horsbacke and meruaylously trapped in
aparell w{h} rychesse. Than w{h} hym came y{e} lorde Wyllyam Hawarde as
depute to y{e} duke of Norfolke in y{e} rome of y{e} marshal of Englande
on horsbacke. The erle of essex caruer. Therle of Sussex sewer. Therle of
Darby cupberer. Therle of Arundell butteller. The visconte lysle panter.
The lorde Bray awmoner. These noble men dyd theyr seruyce in suche humble
sorte and fassyon that it was wonder to se the payne and dylygence of them
beynge suche noble personages. The seruyce borne by Knyghtes whiche were
to me to longe to tell in order the goodly seruyce of kyndes of meate with
their deuyses from the hyest vnto the lowest there haue not ben sene more
goodlyer nor honorablyer done in no mannes dayes. There was foure tables
in y{e} great hall alonge the sayde hall. The noble women one table
syttyng al on y{e} one syde. The noble men an other table. The mayre of
London an other table w{h} his bretherne. The barons of the portes with
y{e} mayster of the chauncery the fourth table. And thus all thynges nobly
and tryumphantly done at her coronacyon her grace retourned to Whyte hall
with great ioy and solempnyte and the morowe was great iustes at y{e}
tylte done by xviij. lordes and knyghtes where was broken many speares
valyauntly: but some of their horses wolde nat come at their pleasure nere
unto the tylte whiche was displeasure to some that there dyd ronne.

  Thus endeth this tryumphe: Imprinted
     at London in Flete-strete
     by Wynkyn de Worde
     for Johan Goughe,


_Cum Priuilegio._




Footnotes:

[1] I believe the woodcut represents Henry VIII. although the horsecloth
has a _fleur de lys_ on it, and not the Tudor rose; probably Henry wore
the _fleur de lys_ in compliment to Francis.

[2] The title of the Second Edition is as follows:--

        The Maner of the
        Tryumphe at Caleys and Bulleyn.
        The second pryntyge with more addicions as it was
        done in dede.

        Cum Priuilegio Regali.

[3] In the Museum copy are two MS. Latin lines:

  "Congressus lector fuma et foedera Regum
    Et quas vix credas pretiosas perlege pompas."

[4] In the Second Edition, the text begins with:

        "The names of the noble men of Fraunce.

        Fyrst the frensshe Kynge.[A]
        The kynge of Nauerne.[B]
        The Dolphyn Duke of Brytayne Frauncys.
        The duke of Orlyaunce Henry.
        The duke of Angoulesme Charles.
        The duke of Vendosme Charles.
        The duke of Guyse.[C]
        The duke of Longouille.[D]
        The cardynall of Burbon.
        The cardynall of Lorrayne.[E]
        The legate and cardynall chaunceler of Fraunce Antony de prayt.[F]
        The cardynal tournon.[G]
        The cardynal gramond.[H]
        The marques of Lorayne de pont.
        The marques of Rochelyne.
        The two sonnes of the duke of Uendosme.
        The sone of the duke of Guyse conte damualle.[I]
        The conte of saynt Poule Frauncys de Burbon.
        The conte of Neuers.
        The conute[J] Loys de Neuers conte danseore.
        The lorde marshall seigneur de Floraynge.
        The lorde myrepois marshall de la foy.[K]
        The conte de porsean.
        The conte de bresne.
        The conte de tonnore.[L]
        The conte de sensare.
        The conte de grant pre.
        The conte d'apremont.
        The lorde greate mayster Anne de momerancy.[M]
        The lorde admarald Philyp Schabbot.[N]
        The lorde grand esquyer Galliot.
        The prynce of molse.
        The conte de tande.[O]
        The conte de villars.[P]
        The conte de estampes Johan de la berre.[Q]
        The conte de chambre.[R]
        The lorde canamples.
        The lorde barbeluiez.
        The lorde hummeres.[S]
        The lorde roche piot.
        The lorde of saynt Andrews.
        The lorde montigeu.
        The lorde roche guyon.
        The lorde piennes.
        The lorde pontremy.
        Monsieur de longe.
        Monsieur de belley.[T]
        The archebysshop of Roan.
        The archebysshop of Vienne.
        The bysshop of Lyseures.
        The bysshop of Langres.
        The bysshop of Charttres.
        The bysshop of Lymoges.
        The bysshop of beauuoys.
        The bysshop of Auuergne.
        The bysshop of Macon.
        The bysshop of Castres.
        The bysshop of Paris.
        The bysshop of Angoulesme.

        And as concernynge the nobles and ryall states
        of this realme it nedeth not to expresse by name.

        [A] _Francis I._

        [B] _Henry d'Albret, King of Navarre._

        [C] _Claude de Lorraine, first duke of Guise._

        [D] _The duke de Longueville._

        [E] _Jean de Lorraine, brother of the duke de Guise._

        [F] _Antoine Duprat had been tutor to Francis I. He must have been
        an old man at this time, for he died in 1535 at the age of 72._

        [G] _Of François de Tournon, de Thou says: "Homme d'une prudence,
        d'une habilete pour les affaires, et d'un amour pour sa patrie,
        presque au-dessus de tout ce qu'on peut poser." He died in 1562._

        [H] _Gabriel, Cardinal de Grammont, was the last of the male line
        of this celebrated family. His sister married into the family of_
        AURE, _which then took the name and arms the de Grammonts_.

        [I] _D'Aumale._

        [J] _Sic._

        [K] _A descendant of Guy de Levis, who was elected marshall of the
        Crusaders who marched against the Albigenses; hence his successors
        were all called Marechaux de la Foi. He received the lands of
        Mirepoix, in Languedoc, in return for his services. The family
        became very illustrious, and we refer readers who have the time
        and patience to study a very curious piece of history, to the
        writings of Cartier and Lognac._

        [L] _The Comte de Tonnerre._

        [M] _He began life as page to Francis I., became Constable of
        France in 1538, and died at the age of 74, at the battle of St
        Denis, killed, it is said, by a Scotsman named Stuart._

        [N] _Phillipe Chabot, Seigneur de Brion, in Poitou, a great
        protégé of the celebrated Duchesse d'Etampes._

        [O] _This is undoubtedly Honorat, son of Villars, Comte de Tende,
        natural son of Philip, duke of Savoy. Villars had been killed at
        Pavia in 1525. Honorat's daughter married the great duke de
        Mayenne._

        [P] _André de Brancas, comte de Villars._

        [Q] _Jean de Berri, comte d'Etampes._

        [R] _? Chambéry._

        [S] _Probably Henry de Crévant d'Humières, ancestor of the
        celebrated marechal d'Humières._

        [T] _Probably Martin du Bellay, prince d'Yvetot._

[5] Knights.

[6] The Second Edition omits: "and."

[7] Persons.

[8] The Second Edition inserts: "At ye metyng of these two noble kynges
there were sacres and sacrettes cast of and at dyuerse flyghtes two kytes
were beten downe which were sooryng in y{e} ayre w{h} such lyke pastyme
whiche greatly pleased al the nobles on bothe partyes."

[9] The Second Edition reads "persons" thus "psones."

[10] The Second Edition has "a batayle ax."

[11] The Second Edition inserts: "The tuysday beynge y{e} seconde day of
hys there beyng the frenssh king gaue our kyng ryche apparayle wrought
with nedle werke pyrled[U] w{h} golde in y{e} whiche lyke apparayle bothe
y{e} kynges went to our lady chyrche in Bulleyn And at that time our kyng
optayned release and lyberte of the frenssh kyng for all prysoners at that
tyme beynge prisoners in Bulleyn. And in lykewyse dyd the frenssh kyng in
Caleys of our kyng and mayster at his there beynge and optayned grace for
all banysshed men whiche wolde make sute for theyr pardon. And to esteme
y{e} rich trauerses[V] y{t} were in Bulleyn at our lady chyrche and in
Caleys in our lady chyrche in lykewyse for bothe the kynges the riche
ordynaunces and prouysyon for the same it is to moche for to wryte. And as
for the greate chere" &c.

     [U] _Fringed._

     [V] _Low curtains._

[12] The Second Edition omits: "there."

[13] Baggage.

[14] The Second Edition reads for: "And when they came to Calais" ... "And
so commynge towarde Caleys the duke of Rychemonde accompanyed with
bysshops and many other noble men that were not with the kyng at Bulleyn
and all the kynges garde which were with all other meruaylously well
horsed and trymde they stode in aplace appoynted in aray and good order in
the way two mile out of Caleys where the frensshe kynge sholde come who
saluted y{e} frensshe kynge with great honour in lyke maner as the kynge
our mayster was saluted at Bulleyn with amykable and moost goodly
salutacyons as euer was seen they were saluted w{h} great melody," &c. &c.

[15] For "after noone" the Second Edition reads, "after onne."

[16] The Second Edition reads "soup" for "souper."

[17] Anne Boleyn.

[18] Lady Mary Boleyn.

[19] The Second Edition reads "passeth" for "passed."

[20] Saint Michael.

[21] After "most falls" the Second Edition inserts, "And as concernynge
y{e} haboundaunt and lyberal multytude of gyftes that were so louyngly and
cordyally gyuen on bothe partyes (to the greate honour of bothe the
kynges) my penne or capacit can not expresse it as well amonge the greate
lordes as vnto the lowest yemen that bare ony offyce in eyther kynges hous
and specially the kynges gyftes on both partyes alway rewarded the one
lyke vnto y{e} other And all other gyftes was nothynge but ryche plate
golde coyne and syluer was of no estymacyon beside raymentes horses
geldynges fawcons beres dogges for the game with many other whiche were to
moche to write. And upon y{e} xxix. day" &c.

[22] MS note: Q. Anne Bullen the second wife of K. Henry 8 was crowned at
Westminster on Whitsonday the first of Iune Anno Domini MDXXXIII. This
triumph is set forth at large in Stowes Chronicle.

[23] 1533.

[24] City companies.

[25] Displayed.

[26] Swift ships.

[27] Bedecked.

[28] "Sic."

[29] French, "_incontinent_," immediately.

[30] Sic.

[31] In the original copy, in the British Museum, the corner is torn off
after the letter "r" but the three missing letters are of course "ich."

[32] The missing letter is as evidently "s."

[33] Gracechurch Street.

[34] Wife.

[35] Torn away.

[36] Idem.

[37] The posy is not given in the original.

[38] Collation.

[39] Whenever the five ports are mentioned in the original a curious
contraction is used at the end of the word probably for "es."

[40] Vestments.

[41] A misprint for adourned.




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _underscore_.

Superscripted letters are shown in {brackets}.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Maner of the Tryumphe of Caleys
and Bulleyn and The Noble Tryumphant Coronacyon of Quene Anne, Wyfe unto the Most Noble Kynge Henry VIII, by Wynkyn de Worde

